\chapter{Introduction}

Interest in \gls{nfcs} by the \gls{USDOE} Office of Nuclear Energy intensified
in the mid-2000's as a variety of policy issues conveged to prompt a renewed
interest in advanced nuclear fuel cycles.  Whereas closed fuel cycles have
always been imagined as a way to extend uranium resources, their ability to
reduce the burden of radioactive waste management was a new motivation, as was
the possibility of reducing global proliferation risk by implementating
international nuclear fuel cycle services.  With a richer set of possible
benefits, new tools were necessary to provide insight into the degree to which
different technology options would have an impact on these and other
socio-political metrics.

The fundamental purpose of a \gls{nfcs} is to track the mass flows and
isotopic composition of material as it moves among facilities in a complete
nuclear fuel cycle.  At a minimum, the set of facilities should include
nuclear reactors for the consumption of uranium and the production of
transuranics and fission products, but most tools include front-tend
facilities including mines, enrichment facilities and fuel fabrication
facilities, as well as back-end facilities including storage and separations.
As they become more sophisticated, a \gls{nfcs} will also track information
about facility deployment, utilization and decommissioning, in order to
support economic assessments that are dominated by the capital costs and
capacity factors of those facilities.

A variety of such tools emerged, often developed to answer specific
programmatic questions.  Most notable among these tools were Dymond, DANESS
and VISION, all initially developed at national laboratories and sharing a
common heritage.  Although they continue to provide value to the nuclear fuel
cycle analysis community, a number of limitations were identified in these
tools, leading to a desire for a \gls{ngfcs}.

One limitation of the previous tools was their reliance on a systems dynamics
framework.  Such frameworks were attractive because of the graphical
development environments of stocks and flows that mapped well onto the
material flow modeling at the core of a \gls{nfcs}.  However, the stock and
flow paradigm requires all models to be expressed in the context of a
first-order ODE solved with an Eulerian approach.  Many models are not
well-suited to this approach and require the implementation of alternative
methods as extensions to the systems dynamics framework using a more
traditional programming interface, ths diminishing the value of the graphical
development environment.  Systems dynamics platforms also suffered from
limitations on the size of problem they could accommodate, particularly early
in the development of these tools.  As it became necessary of desirable to
expand the number of isotopes tracked in material flows and incorporate large
matrices to represent the long term response of those material flows, limits
in the total data footprint were reached.  \gls{nfcs} were often the largest
models to ever be implemented in these platforms and close collaboration with
their developers led to improvements that relaxed these limits.  The systems
dynamics platforms were not well-suited to collaborative development because
it contributions from individual developers could only be merged manually.
Finally, these platforms required the purchase of commercial licenses for each
user at each site, both costly and an obstacle to deployment at large scales
for parametric studies, sensitivity analysis and/or optimization.

Another limitation arose from the problem-focused development path for these
tools.  Because it was necessary to prioritize particular candidate fuel
cycles, they each developed depth in their modeling fidelity to support those
specific fuel cycles and without sufficient modularity to quickly incorporate
novel technologies.  As policy-driven interest in specific fuel cycles waned,
these tools became valuable to understand the fuel cycle impact of a variety
of novel nuclear energy technologies.  Incorporating these technologies in the
existing tools required a steep learning curve to first learn the particular
systems dynamics platform and then understand the modeling approaches used to
incorporate the complexity of real fuel cycles.  This was often beyond the
scope of many small technology development efforts, especially when crude
estimates of the steady-state fuel cycle impacts were possible with simple
spreadsheet models.  At the same, time each of the tools had implemented
slightly different assumptions and approximations rendering comparison a
challenge and ultimately undermining confidence in their ability to produce
reliable results.

Finally, the user experience for these tools was never a focus during their
development, despite the recognized value in enabling their use by a broader
set of audiences to improve the communication of their results.  Fuel cycle
scenarios were defined by data in ever-growing spreadsheets and results stored
in even bigger spreadsheets.  Visualization of both input and output data was
generally limited to the spreadsheet software's capabilities.

Therefore, the Fuel Cycle Research & Development program chose to develop a
\gls{ngfcs} platform with sufficient modularity to accommodate a wide variety
of audiences, use cases and developer needs. The requirements for this
framework included the modeling of discrete transactions of materials among a
set of discrete facilities operating in distinct geographic regions. All
transactions would arise as the result of resolving a set of offers and
requests in a market whose transaction costs may be determined by a wide array
of economic, political and technical parameters. Most importantly, a modular
“plug-in” architecture would allow user-developers to introduce different
models with alternative market and facility behaviors, thereby isolating
variations in modeling to single changes. The fundamental data generated by
such a framework includes a list of material transactions and the facilities
involved in such transactions, a history of the isotopic composition of each
material object, and an operating history for each facility. As additional
plug-in modules are developed, additional data will be generated related to
the facility histories, material histories, or market transactions.

The NGFCS was also expected to be a useful evaluation tool for a variety of
audiences.  Non-technical audiences would interact with the NGFCS in a way
that allowed them to express critical high-level decisions and understand the
outcomes of those decisions in a set of key metrics. At the same time, expert
audiences migh be interested in a quantitative technology assessment to help
motivate design improvements. Developers of the NGFCS would need to visualize
their results to ensure consistency and correctness. Given the wide array of
possible metrics and summaries, each type of user might want to gradually
explore the results with increasing depth and sophistication. At the same
time, it was important that the NGFCS allow experts to introduce new modules
to capture specific physical models or market behavior, but rely on a common
infrastructure that facilitates direct comparisons of results.

\section{Research Plan Overview}

This project was therefore designed to explore strategies and develop tools to
enhance the user experience for the next generation fuel cycle simulator for a
range of target audiences.  The research plan identified five thrusts:
\begin{enumerate}
  \item Stakeholder, parameter and metric identification
  \item User interface and model generation
  \item Metric translation
  \item Visualization environment
  \item Efficient design of a client-server model
\end{enumerate}

Thrust 1 was led by experts in communication science, and specifically in the
science of communicating about controversial science.  This critical project
element was designed to enhance the relevance of the \gls{ngfcs} to a wider
audience than the traditional nuclear engineering audience of previous tools
by identifying the metrics that address the questions and conerns of those
audiences rather than focusing on the metrics that the nuclear engineering
community values.  This thrust incorporated a thorough review of prior
testimony and historical documents to identify stakeholders and the issues
that they raised, interviews with a variety of individuals representing those
stakeholder groups to further identify the important issues, a survey of a
larger community of stakeholder to develop a quantitative understanding of how
those issues were related to each other, and an experiment to understand how
different forms of visualization would communicate the results of a fuel cycle
simulation.  A detailed account of the work performed under this thrust is
found in Chapter \ref{chap:thrust1}.

The primary purpose of Thrust 2 was to develop a convenient graphical
interface by which users could define the fuel cycle scenarios of interest to
them.  Inspired by the drag-and-drop promise of the systems dynamics paradigm,
this interface would allow users to build high-level graphical representation
of a nuclear fuel cycle by placing and connecting individual facilities.
Particular consideration would be given to the rules for connecting facilities
to reduce the depth of nuclear engineering domain knowledge expected of users
while still preserving a physically valid flow path for material.  The
interface would expose varying level of detail, with many default values
hidden from users seeking a simpler experience, but available to those users
looking to control all parameters.  Each of these parameters would be
self-documented by the interface allowing users to quickly learn what the
valid purpose and range of each parameter is.
